This adds the maturity model as proposed in #116 (#121)
gruetter/innerSourceTest: maturity-model.md

and more people are gaining at least a basic understanding of what it means to
work in an InnerSource project. Looking at all InnerSource projects though the
depth of understanding for the concept will diverge. Teams may not be aware of
proven patterns that would help them move to the next level and solve issues and
pain points that they are dealing with.

## Context

Several teams have started adopting InnerSource practices. The exact level of
understanding of the practice diverges between teams. The exact problems teams
run into diverge depending on the context and working environment of each team.
As a result the definition of what are important best practices in an
InnerSource project differs depending on each team.

## Forces

Teams sharing InnerSource learnings run into misunderstandings as they are not
aware of their respective level of InnerSource adoption.

Teams believe that "it's all about migrating to a shared software development
forge".

Teams are not aware of best practices that would help them solve issues that
they run into in their daily doing.

## Solution

Ask teams to self assess against the proposed maturity model.

### Transparency

> **Plans & Products**

Author: I like how this proposal originally coming from @dicortazar takes planning into consideration as well.

* PP-0: Individuals and teams do not regularly disclose their plans or products to multiple stakeholders. No formal actions exists at the organization.

> * PP-1: Individuals and teams give visibility to their plans or products to multiple stakeholders, before they are started. Shared roadmap.

Author: This mentions that there is a shared roadmap. In the two points below we do not talk about whether or not the roadmap should remain shared - also, is that "roadmap for this InnerSource project is shared with others" or is it "the organisation has one shared roadmap for all projects". I would assume the former but maybe making that explicit would make it clearer.

Reviewer: Thanks @MaineC for your comments.
Do you think it makes sense to state explicitly in each of the following two bullet points that the roadmap is already shared?

A proposal:
PP-2: There are already shared roadmaps with clear guidelines and contribution rules where stakeholders can provide feedback. However this is not standardized across the organization and not all of the projects provide this info.
PP-3: Roadmaps are shared by default and there is a standard process and homogeneous way to do this across the organization at the level of each InnerSource project. This contains clear rules to contribute and influence in the roadmap.

Author: I like your proposed re-formulation of PP-2 and PP-3. They also make it clear that we are talking about separate roadmaps per project - each of which is shared.

* PP-2: Stakeholders can contribute to some plans or products.
* PP-3: There is an standard process for collective product and plans definition.

**Development Process & Tools**

> 

Author: I believe we are only scratching the surface here - this focusses on CI, code repositories and code review. Maybe rename the point to something more specific? Though I'm not sure to what.

Author: Also what I'm missing in this point is a mention of how InnerSource projects can define their own development process, but should publish that in a Contributing.md file. I believe this level of autonomy coupled with the transparency of having to communicate this process is vital when scaling InnerSource as it allows teams to develop independently.

Another point I'm missing is that in mature InnerSource projects I would expect process changes to happen through Pull Requests to those documents containing the process description: You want us to do code review differently? Post a pull request changing our contributing.md file and we'll take it from there. That way even governance can happen in an async fashion.

Reviewer: Regarding to your second comment, I'd say that it is good that each InnerSource project defines its own process, but at the same time, one of the goals of InnerSource is to create homogeneous ways of contributing across the organization. Thus, having a similar infra (e.g., GitHub/GitLab/etc) may help in this process.

Thus, as an overall goal here: the purpose of this section was to provide a way to assess the development process (mainly taking into account the first areas you mention such as CI, repositories, code review), but having under control the myriad of options out there and defining a common process within the organization.

At the InnerSource Commons we saw some cases where organizations are facing the issue of having isolated technological islands (e.g., certain programming language, certain tooling, certain process, etc). But when this is so specific to the team idiosyncrasy, and this team does not exist any more, then we have the maintenance issues, etc.

So, the proposal here is more focused on having a mature development process, but at the same time creating an homogeneous way of doing this across the organization.

What do you think @MaineC ?

Author: After thinking back and forth and comparing to open source projects, I agree with the point you are making, but would phrase it differently. .oO(this will take some typing to expand)

Regarding defining your own processes: I still think there is value in that. Think "how many trusted committer approvals do we require before merging?", "how should you approach us when making changes - do we always require an issue up front, or are we ok with receiving a pull request right away?", "exactly which issues will you run into when running our test suite?"

I believe giving projects some flexibility here helps reduce up-front coordination on how teams want to operate. (Think about the never ending discussion of where the curly braces should be put - over time, I have stopped worrying about that and simply follow the style that is already being used in the project.)

On the other end of the spectrum there are projects that move to exotic version control systems and build their own build systems. This happens in the open source world as well - with different degrees of success: Chrome (IIRC) at some point had to move to a more standard build tool to gain more contributors. The Linux kernel managed to establish their own version control system as the new normal.

In mature Inner Source projects me personally, I would expect trusted committers to be able to make a call which technology is best for the project - balanced with which technology is best to increase the likelihood of finding new contributors (use standard tooling, if you want to boost adoption and contributions).

In less mature organisations I would expect either everything being prescribed - or decisions on which to use being based not with the goal of increasing contribution levels, but based on team internal metrics only.

Right now, I have no idea how to transform this line of thinking into clear maturity levels - not even sure if that would help those adopting InnerSource who do not have years of Open Source experience - including years of searching for new contributors. It takes a while to realize that it takes people to write software.

* DP-0:	Each team follows its own development process and tools. They are not defined to share knowledge and artifacts outside development team. Siloed development teams.
* DP-1: Development teams use shared code repositories, internally. Some teams develop their own CI process, using non corporate or standard CI tools. There is no code review process defined, although some projects teams do it internally.
* DP-2: The organization sponsors and promotes a shared repository for collective knowledge. Some teams develop their own CI process, using corporate CI tools. There are CI environments. Code review process defined, and used by some projects. Code review is sometimes done by external team members.

> * DP-3: Most teams develop their own CI process, using corporate CI tools. There are CI environments. Code review process defined, and used by some projects. Code review is usually done by external team members.

Author: I don't understand the point about code review usually being done by external team members.

Reviewer: I think we can simplify this to the fact that there is a proper collaboration in place. If we reach DP-3, this would mean that code review is already in place, and people and different business units are reviewing each other.

> **Decisions**

Author: I wonder if one should distinguish company wide decisions and InnerSource project internal decisions?

> * DC-0: Decision-makers often withhold data and resources without explanation.

Author: ```suggestion
* DC-0: Decision-makers often intentionally or accidentally withhold data and resources related to project decisions.
```

* RS-1:	Individuals and teams release project materials for review internally, after they've finished their work. Individuals and teams share resources, but in disconnected, fragmented, or individualized/siloed systems or repositories. Individuals and teams share resources, but there is no commonly expressed or shared understanding of the criteria used to determine whether information is sensitive or not. Do not "share thinking on others".
* RS-2: Individuals and teams make project-related materials accessible to some members of project teams according to clearly defined and shared formats and/or protocols. Individuals and teams withhold sensitive data and resources, provide limited details, context, and scope.
* RS-3: Individuals and teams make project-related materials broadly accessible to the organization—and possibly outside the organization as well—according to clearly defined and shared formats and/or protocols. Individuals and teams who must withold sensitive data and resources are clear about what they're not sharing, and others understand why those materials are not available to them.

> **Stories**

Author: While this is important for InnerSource to thrive I wonder if this could be phrased more specifically for InnerSource or at least be extended by an explanation of why that is important? Thinking about it, the "why is this point important" likely should be added to all of these points.

Reviewer: Perhaps experiences?

The rationale for this point is that it is important to learn from each others, no matters if these are failures or successes.

Author: I tried to re-phrase and add as a rationale. Feedback welcome.

* ST-0: Individuals and teams don't share neither successes nor failures for others to learn from.
* ST-1: Individuals and teams are comfortable sharing stories about successes, but not about failures.
* ST-23	Individuals and teams are comfortable sharing stories of successes and failures during retrospectives and reviews.
* ST-3:	Individuals and teams are comfortable sharing stories of successes and failures, and learn from failures according to formal protocols.

### Collaboration

**Channels for Providing Feedback**

> 

Author: This point seems to mix several aspects into one.

Likely it tries to talk about "Communication channels for projects", "Feedback culture", "Channels for development discussions", "Channels for user support"?

Reviewer: Initially any channel of communication that helps to start building a community, or several of them, within the organization.

Thus, there final goal is to have proper communication channels known by anyone in the organization and potentially with different goals (announcements, training, project channels, infra discussions, etc).

The goal here is not to define the really specific communication channels you need, but make it clear that you need them and that they should follow certain guidelines (e.g., netiquette). This again helps to have an homogeneous way of behaving within the organization (e.g., using a specific provider for this), following certain rules (e.g., create a project channel each time there's a new project, open the channel to the public, foster discussions in the channels), and with the goal of having a referenceable and archivable body of knowledge (e.g., as in the case of the ASF with mailing list discussions).

Author: Likely this goal should then be added as further explanation of the point :)

Author: I tried to rephrase and add as an introduction sentence.

**Contribution**

* CB-0:	Completly siloed, no collaboration outside the teams. Just some collaborations due to cross-functional teams.
* CB-1:	Members of the organization and teams collaborate but frequently say it's "too difficult". Teams infrequently revisit the outcomes of their collaborations.
* CB-2:	Members of the organization and teams actively seek opportunities to collaborate. Teams routinely discuss, revisit and debate the outcomes of their collaborative efforts, and make these outcomes available by default.
* CB-3:	Members of the organization collaborate both internally and externally in ways that benefit all involved. Teams routinely discuss, revisit and debate the outcomes of their collaborative efforts, and share their learnings outside the organization, and make these outcomes externally available by default.

### Community

**Sharing Policies**

* SP-0: No sharing culture nor written policies.
* SP-1:	Some members of the organization unite to define values and principles, but are not clearly supported when they do.

> * SP-2:	Members of the organization collectively document shared visions and agreements like mission statements and codes of conduct, make them easily accessible, and reference them often. Onboarding materials and orientation rituals provide adequate context for helping new members understand how the organization will benefit from their contributions.

Author: This sounds more like "how mature is the entire organisation to adopt InnerSource" than "how mature is the InnerSource project itself". The deeper I dive, I think these two questions should be separated. In some of the points above we seem to be speaking about the setup of individual InnerSource projects. In others about the entire organisation.

Reviewer: The goal here is to have a common way of behaving across the organization. And for this, there is a need to build certain set of rules and guidelines that everyone agrees, knows and is able to reference if needed at some point.

When discussing about InnerSource in the previous sections, the goal at the very end is to have a common set of rules and guidelines we can all discuss about, share and reference if needed. It happens that depending on the level, it may make sense to start at the project level or at the organization level.

I see for instance that if we have a new tool, let's say Slack/Mattermost/RocketChat/etc.. to communicate internally, this should/may be fostered by the organization or the InnerSource program within the organization. And this is another tool that will hopefully make more productive/collaborative/communicative the several developers and contributors.

On the other hand, there might be cases where at the level of project, a specific group of people or the trusted committer decides that when coming to my project in my internal infrastructure, you should behave in a certain way and that the code review process takes place in a certain way due to project constraints. These constraints are project related and not organization related, while certain behaviors make more sense to have them discussed at the organization level.

Summarizing: the approach is top down or down top depending on the case and the maturity level. We may specify this specific context in each of the maturity levels if you think this is useful.

An example of this would be to state (just an example) that communication is a more top down approach where the InnerSource initiative will provide the tooling, training, and certain guidelines (once the community start using that tool). And then the specific guidelines about how to contribute to a certain project, although narrowed by the specific infra used (Gerrit, PRs, MRs, etc), are decided by each of the InnerSource projects (e.g., having 2 +2 positive votes as done in OpenStack instead of only one +2 vote).

What do you think about this?

Author: I think I understand now better where you are going with this point. I've tried to capture it in the motivation for that point in the model. Feedback welcome.

Author: And thank you for taking the time to type up the explanation above.

* SP-3:	Shared values and principles inform decision-making, conflict resolution, and assessment processes among members of the organization, who reference these values and principles consistently in both verbal and written formats.

> **Feel part of the Organization**

Author: The points below sound fairly vague and like they apply to any organisation - not only to those trying to adopt InnerSource. I'd likely remove them or try to make them more relevant to the InnerSource context.

Reviewer: Having a sense of ownership to a certain project, and increasing the engagement within the organization is one of the points of having an InnerSource initiative in place.

We tried to use this concept of 'feeling part of something', but happy to reword this to really include the concept of engagement. Any suggestion?

Author: Hmm - you explaining that increasing engagement can be one reason for introducing an InnerSource initiative helped me understand better, why this is part of the capabilities model. Do you think adding this explanation would make sense?

* PA-2:	Members of the organization feel comfortable sharing their thoughts and opinions without fear of retribution. Leaders demonstrate dedication to the organization's shared values.
* PA-3:	The organization is proactive in telling members that it benefits from their contributions; as such, members demonstrate shared consciousness and empowered execution, and feel a sense of responsibility to the community. Leaders understand that they grow by helping others grow, and they mentor junior members of the organization.

### Governance

**Rewards**

* RW-0:	No rewards.
* RW-1:	Leaders are encouraged to reward exceptional collaborations, but there are no policies or processes established.
* RW-2:	Standard processes are established to reward collaborations outside the developers' teams. Team leaders or boards decide who has to be rewarded.
* RW-3:	Rewards are not only proposed by the organization, but the communities are able to define their more valuable rewards. The community is responsible to decide who has to be rewarded.

**Monitoring Policies**

> 

Author: While important, this needs to be formulated in a much more InnerSource specific way to make sense in that context. Also it could be interpreted two ways:

InnerSource projects using metrics internally to track deployment performance, to track project progress.

InnerSource program metrics to track InnerSource adoption.

All of these are important, but I believe we should make explicit which we are talking about here.

Reviewer: I'd say this should include both cases, projects self-assessing and to monitor the InnerSource initiative as a whole.

What about the following?

MP-0: No existing monitoring policies at any level in the organization.
MP-1:  Metrics are important for certain teams, and they start using them in an isolated way.
MP-2: There is a strategy at the organizational level with respect to metrics that help to validate specific policies across the organization. This monitoring policy exists at the level of some of the InnerSource projects.
MP-3: There are clear guidelines, recommendations, and trainings about the use of metrics with certain infrastructure provided by the organization. This works at both levels: InnerSource program to understand the general InnerSource adoption within the organization, and at the level of InnerSource projects.

Author: +1, I've changed the wording as per your suggestion and added some additional rationale to the section.

* MP-0:	No existing monitoring policies.
* MP-1:	Some people start using metrics for their own needs at their own hierarchical level.
* MP-2:	Existing process at the organization.
* MP-3:	Clear rules and processes in the use of metrics with specific training and monitoring in place.

> **Support and Maintenance**

Author: Again this sounds more like a point that is relevant for pretty much any tech department and not InnerSource specific.

To make it InnerSource specific we could talk about adoption of the 30-day warranty and service vs. library patterns.

Reviewer: That's a good idea: link to existing patterns or to the creation of new patterns to open certain discussions.

I think it makes sense to have this across the model.

* SP-0:	Support given by the core dev or support team. A business contract guaranties the support. There is no knowledge about the product outside the team.
* SP-2:	There are rules and regulations to formalize the support on the product, given by a dedicated supporting team.
* SP-3:	There are rules and regulations to formalize the support on the product, given by a mature community.

**Culture**

> 

Author: I added some prose to each point below, please correct where I added the wrong prose.

Reviewer: +1 :)

* CL-0: Silos - teams work independently but also in isolation.
* CL-1: Reactive - teams work independently, but know how to react to flaws in dependencies.
* CL-2: Contributive - teams actively help improve their dependencies by contributing.
* CL-3: Activist - teams actively seek help, mentor and recruit new contributors.

**InnerSource Roles**

> 

Author: Again I would split this into organisation vs. specific project.
